Well our entire authentication flow works.
But like I mentioned the end of the last video there's a very large security issue inside of our code
base right now.
So in this video we're going to discuss exactly what the security issue is and how to fix it.
So let's take a look inside of my project directory.
I'm going to open up the users dot just on file so inside of here we have a couple of different users
we have created by logging into our application the big issue is an every single case we are storing
the passwords that were provided in plain text.
So in other words if some malicious user ever somehow got access to this user Scott JS on file and saw
everything inside of it it would instantly know the email and the entire password of every user inside
of our project.
And that might not sound like a big issue in the context of our project because hey.
So what they got all of our passwords what do we really care.
This is kind of a test project anyways.
The reason that this is a problem is that many users out there decide to use the same email and password
combination for a variety of different services.
So even though they might be signing into our e commerce application with like test one at test dot
com and password and that might not seem like a big deal.
Well that user might have the same log in credentials for their bank account as well.
And so if some malicious user got access to this information they could take every email password combination
site of here and go try to log on to some bank account and then eventually chances are they're going
to find some account information that will work to access a bank account and that malicious user might
clear out that user's bank balance you get the idea so in general we never ever under any scenario store
passwords in plain text as we are currently doing.
So in this video we're going to figure out how we can somehow store passwords but in a different format
it will still allow us to validate a password whenever a user is trying to sign an SO to understand
how we're going to do this we're going to first take a look at a very small side topic.
Here we go.
Quick diagram so we're going to discuss something called a hashing algorithm.
There are many different hashing algorithms in existence.
These are all different functions implemented in a variety of different computer programming languages.
The goal of a hashing algorithm is to take a string and it based upon the letters inside that string
spit out a random series of numbers and letters.
Now it might appear that these are random numbers and letters but there's a very important property
about this hashing algorithm if we ever put in the same exact string to a hashing algorithm twice.
We're always going to get the exact same output back.
So in other words if I take my password and I run a given hash algorithm a hundred times or a thousand
times as long as the input string is still my password I'm always going to get back this exact series
of characters we can test out some different hashing algorithms very quickly by doing a quick google
search.
You can search for something like SHA 256 calculator
the words SHA 256 is the name of a popular hash and algorithm so you can find basically any results
on here any search results click it and you'll probably see an interface like this one right here on
the right hand side for this very particular tool are a variety of different hashing algorithms.
So we're taking a look at a very particular one.
Like I said called SHA 256 so inside this thing we could type in some text input so I got to put in
my password and as soon as I do you can either click on auto update or click on the hash button manually
and you're going to see the hashed output of our string now like I said the important thing to understand
here is that no matter how many times we attempt to run this hashing algorithm on the string we're always
going to get the same exact output.
So long as it is the same input.
So for example if I highlight my password right here and cut it out and then paste my password back
in I'm going to get the exact same string.
So notice out of that is 8 9 0.
I'll do it again I'll cut paste I see 8 9 0 0 delete the D at the end and then put the DB back and I
see 8 9 0.
So no matter how many times I run this algorithm with that same string I always get the exact same output
another important attribute of hashing algorithms is that if I make even a very small change to its
original string the out hashed output is going to be very significantly different.
So it's not going to be just like the last couple of characters or change or something like that.
Instead if I say delete the d off the very end I see just about every single character inside there
has changed.
If I take off the art now I see once again every single character just about has changed.
Again another important attribute of hashing algorithms is that they do not work in reverse.
So in other words if I hash the string my password and get out 8 9 0 blah blah blah like so I cannot
somehow take this output throw it back into the algorithm and get my password back.
So in other words this doesn't work.
I can't take the hashed output copy paste it throw it into the hashing algorithm and expect to receive
back by password.
There is absolutely zero feasible way right now.
At some point time in the future once computers are powerful enough it is possible that some of these
different hashing algorithms can be ran in reverse.
Right now there is no feasible way to take like that string right there and somehow plug it into an
algorithm and get the original string back out you can once again verify this very quickly by running
the hashing algorithm on my password and taking the hashed output and throwing it in as the input I
don't get some like magic string coming out.
Instead I just get another hashed output because now I'm computing a hash on it that input string right
there.
So all these different properties come together in a very useful way when it comes to storing passwords
securely.
Let's discuss how we can use this idea of a hashing algorithm to securely store a password so the entire
idea here is that we never actually store the user's password at all.
Instead we store the hashed output of the user's password.
So in this diagram we start off at the top left hand side.
A user is going to sign up to our application and we can imagine that they put in a password of my password
were then going to run that password through a hashing algorithm and we're going to get out something
like that hashed out put right there in 90 0 blah blah blah.
That is what we're going to store inside of our database.
So with just that hash right there alone there's no way that someone can take that and somehow figure
out by reversing the hashing algorithm what the original password was.
So now if a user comes back to our application like let's say a week later and tries to sign in in order
to verify whether or not they've provided the correct password we're going to receive whatever password
the user is trying to sign in with we're then going to run the password that they just applied through
our hashing algorithm once again and then we're going to get the hashed output.
Now here's the important part.
We have a copy of the hash power password inside the database and we've got a copy of the hash password
that the user just supplied to us.
So we're then going to do a little comparison.
We're gonna say okay if these two hashed passwords actually match then the correct password must have
just been supplied by the user when they were trying to sign in that's a key to all this rather than
storing the original password.
Store the hashed outputs then when the user tries to sign again hash the password that they just provided
compared the original one with the one that was just applied.
If they're the same the same password must have been supplied both times okay.
So now we have better idea of why we're going to hash a password.
There is one little side corner case to be aware of that.
Well some malicious user could still a run on this process right here and try to figure out exactly
what a user's password is.
It's not super evident by just looking at what we've put together so far.
So let's take a quick pause.
We're gonna look at another diagram and you're going to see another security hole inside this process.
We're going to have to figure out how to patch up as well so quick pause and I'll see you in just a
minute.